When you
look at your life,
the way you live it,
many times
you would have noticed
that you're ruled by compulsive emotions.
Today, you really want to be peaceful.
Today it happens to be your wife's birthday
or husband's something,
you really want to make sure nothing goes wrong.
That's the day just the anger rules you,
just comes out for no reason.
It happened once,
one morning, early in the morning,
Shankaran Pillai
was walking in the neighborhood on the street,
loudly cursing,
Let devil take over your life!
Let snakes infest your belly!
Let the worms come out of your mouth!
Like this he went about cursing.
One of his neighbors saw
this man cursing and going.
He stopped him and asked,
Who are you cursing?
Who are you cursing
early in the morning like this?
He said, It doesn't matter whom,
somebody will come by.
Sooner or later,
somebody is bound to come by,
so I'm cursing right now.
It is not about anybody.
It is not about anything.
It is a compulsive emotion
which is coming out.
Usually, whoever is around you
becomes the victim.
But actually,
it doesn't need anybody.
You can get angry with trees.
So,
these things people try to control
for their whole lifetimes
and nothing changes.
The mechanics of the mind,
the way the mind functions,
is just the way
the karmic substance is,
because mind is just an accumulation.
What kind of accumulation you have,
that's how it functions.
If one has to go beyond the limitations
or beyond the compulsiveness
that a certain type of accumulation
creates within us,
either
one has to raise into
a different level of awareness,
consciousness
with which he can become free.
Or another way is
he has to transform his energies.
Raising to higher levels of consciousness
generally is very deceptive.
Everybody believes
they are very high consciousness.
If you put them to test,
then they'll fail miserably
because
the nature of the mind is such,
it can deceive you till the end.
This is not a simple instrument.
This is a very, very complex instrument.
You may think you know it,
but you will see after 25 years you'll realize
that you've been tricking yourself all the way,
because it's a very, very complex instrument.
Most people are using
just a miniscule of their mind,
so they think it is simple,
otherwise it's a very complex instrument.
So raising
the levels of consciousness
is not out of question,
but still it's very tricky
and can be very deceptive.
People
believe they have changed,
many, many times.
Simply because their situations have
become a little more conducive,
they have changed.
If situations become extreme,
again they're back to the same place.
Yes, have you noticed this
again and again?
Somebody is working in a certain situation
and they don't like it
and they're constantly angry
and disturbed.
They went to a new work situation and they say,
Oh, now I'm fine.
Everything is okay with me.
It is not so.
Everything is not okay with you.
Right now the weather is good,
so you seem to be okay.
Once again the weather turns bad,
which invariably it will today or tomorrow,
again you will go through the same thing.
When you talk about consciousness,
you're looking at life in such a way
that you're not subject to the processes of life,
that the external situations
don't decide who you are.
That's what it means to
become conscious.
That is also a possibility,
but
it can be a great deception game
most of the time.
Transforming your energies
is a more certain and solid way
because here you can't fool yourself,
here you can't imagine things.
You may imagine
I am in heaven,
but nothing moves here
unless you do the right thing with it.
You may imagine that
you're very close to God,
but nothing moves here
unless
something genuinely happens.
So, transforming your energies
is a more sure path,
a more certain path.
You're walking on solid ground.
And all you need is
a certain dedication,
an involvement in a certain practice.
If
one works sufficiently upon his energies
the right sense of understanding
and guidance if it is done,
very easily one can get enlightened
on the level of his energy.
His energy will be enlightened.
His consciousness might not have gone beyond,
but his energies will be enlightened.
We have any number of people
like that around us.
In the last
15-20 years,
we have created many, many people
whose energies are enlightened,
but their consciousness has not risen.
That's a tricky game,
so we don't work on that.
We just leave it.
We're working on it in a certain way,
but we don't
try to raise people's consciousness
in a big way
because
it can be very, very tricky.
It can take you on the wrong path
for a whole lifetime,
and at the end of your life you realize
you've been fooling yourself.
We allow the mind to mature slowly, it's okay.
You can still do stupid things,
but because your energy has reached
a certain peak,
these stupid things don't really affect your life.
They don't rule your life anymore.
There's a very beautiful Zen story.
You might have heard of this master,
he was very popular.
His name was Eno.
When Eno came to the monastery,
the master looked at him
and declared to everybody else,
Eno is enlightened
Then, the next day,
he put Eno in the kitchen
to work for next 12 years in the kitchen.
He declared to everybody he's enlightened,
but then he puts him into kitchen work for 12 years,
an enlightened being,
because only his energy is enlightened.
His consciousness has not risen.
So in many ways,
we have hundreds of people today around us
who are energy wise enlightened,
but their consciousness has not risen
and we are not in a hurry for that.
That will happen,
slowly it will mature.
We could do
a certain
process.
This is something we have been doing
with close groups of people for a long time.
Shiva has also spoken about it.
Shiva says,
When the spinal thread is touched,
a light begins to glow in and around you
If you place the whole attention on the
Sushumna nadi
and if it is properly touched,
then it becomes alive and it glows.
Once it glows,
slowly the energy will mature within a very
short period of time,
and energy will become enlightened.
It glows,
you have a glow of an enlightened being,
but you don't have the consciousness
of an enlightened being.
If you stand,
if you simply sit quietly
you are a powerful being.
If you open your mouth, you're a fool,
that's how you will be.
But it's good to be this way because
this is easy to achieve.
This is easy to achieve,
all you need is dedication,
especially
when I am around,
this is very easy to do.
If we just touch the spinal cord,
it can just
glow.